with youth unemployment on the rise and
worries over further negative impacts on
our economy and recovery and as a recent
graduate as of December 2019 what
assurances do I have as a young person
entering the professional world of work
that there will be enough opportunity
available for me
and what's your your situation Iran so I
had a job offer in the advertising
industry which I was which which is why
I graduated in but it was revoked
because of lockdown and you know they
said that because of their financials
for the rest of the year and the worry
around coronavirus they weren't really
sure if they could keep my new
employment so I'm just a little bit
concerned about if there is enough you
know young people already you don't have
enough opportunity as it is in in the
professional space so just worried about
what plan the government has to sort of
bring that up Chiti up first so you had
a job which is now gone are you working
at all at the moment yeah I met so I'm
currently working food supply it was my
part-time job University and luckily I
didn't hand in my notice so I can still
lucky I could still work there so what a
supermarket something like that right
and just it's out of interest
hands up of our audience how many of you
are either out of work or have been
furloughed right okay um what's gonna
happen to young people Stephen Boris
Johnson talked about it they should all
have apprenticeships is a lot of
people's need to be taken by surprise by
that is that gonna happen
yes well the key challenge really before
is these jobs and if you look at what
happened going into the pandemic we had
halved the rate of unemployment amongst
the young but the young tend to be the
first to feel the impacts of a recession
which is why if you look at the figures
now for the 18 to 24 there 10% of the
working age population where 80% of
welfare claimants so they tend to filled
hardest first and I'm often in the set
is like hospitality tourism where the
impacts are greater
so the strategy has been first to
protect as many jobs as possible that's
why we've had the furlough scheme which
is protected over 9 million jobs so
they're significant cost of over 22
billion pounds the self-employment
scheme which is protected again around
two and a half million jobs a cost of
seven half billion with why we supported
850,000 businesses through the grunt
scheme investing again ten billion
pounds into that so there's been very
significant measures alongside all the
things we've done on cashflow to support
businesses jobs now moving forward
you're right you then go from that
protect phase on to the next phase which
is how do we restart the economy what
are the jobs that we can then move to
from those areas of the economy where
jobs are being lost so greening the
economy looking at the challenge is the
first major economy to set the test of a
net zero by 2050
what about abortion Alton said is
pledged apprenticeships for young people
when more absolutely committed to that
so the Chancellor will give a statement
in July which will be all about the next
phase talking about how we green the
economy how we respond with the
infrastructure projects because we're
absolutely
jobs and jobs particularly for young
people is one of the key challenges
before us and that's very much what
we're focused on within the Treasury at
the moment I oh no Steven is absolutely
correct to say but young people's jobs
right now need to be right at the top of
the priority list
because we know that young people are
the most likely to have been followed
who have had their wages and hours cut
as a result of this crisis and to have
lost their jobs altogether and they're
also the most likely to be working in
the industries that have been hardest
hit by lock down like retail tourism and
hospitality and there are predictions
that there could be youth unemployment
rising by 600,000 this year because
people who are leaving education this
year are coming into a really tough jobs
market the toughest that we've ever seen
so we need specific measures and I have
to say listening to Steven there I'm
surprised he didn't mention more about a
friend
ships and the apprenticeship levy and
the fact that it has not been a success
since it was introduced in 2017 it was
meant to get young more young people
particularly from disadvantaged
backgrounds into apprenticeships to give
them better life chances what we've seen
is that participation rates among those
from more disadvantaged backgrounds has
fallen by 1/3 apprenticeships have gone
more to those from privileged
backgrounds and we see within the rules
that actually the apprenticeship levy
could be used and managers on courses to
get NBA I don't think that's what the
apprenticeship review is metal is meant
to help young people find their feet in
the world of work so it's not
necessarily than about spending money
although there be a case for more time
for funding
it's not spending the money while and
making sure it's actually going to young
people in the labour market
Katie you've got your hand oh I am I
work in hospitality so I'm currently
furloughed and have been since the
middle of March I'm lucky as in I'm 26
I've done hospitality for quite some
number of years so I've already got
experience behind me so if somebody was
more likely to keep me on rather than
somebody who's kind of 1718 and it's
their part-time job while they're
studying I kind of I don't necessarily
disagree with him on I can see the point
that he's making but I also think that
for a while university degrees have been
advertised as the way to go and studying
things I studied music at University I
know people that have studied kind of
like maths and things like that I think
younger people don't necessarily have
the opportunity to go into something
like a trade which is probably more
valuable I do think there's a community
of people who want to be influences and
youtubers and things like that I'm not
saying that's everyone I've seen
everyone is different but I do feel like
that is where people would probably find
more work if they were interested in
more like a trade rather than being an
influencer leave oh yeah I think I Drive
to think what it's going to be like I
graduated last September
in between waiting to start my masters
and saving money for that and it was
already next to impossible for me to
find a job this year so with the
pandemic and with brexit I tried to
think what it's gonna be like for those
graduating this year for me the jobs
that I did find were minimum wage they
didn't cover all of the expenses you
have to talk about with benefits
there's unpaid internships completely
unpaid nothing's paid they're given
disproportionately to privileged people
I never seen in Berkeley reeled off all
these stats about young people and where
they were backing in hospitality and so
that really worries me because you know
these things but there wasn't a pandemic
before so young people were suddenly on
your radar
Kirsti so I was just wondering this is
kind of many ended Steve because I feel
like particularly it's been raised by
the pandemic there's more opportunities
for people to work online and with
everything I'm on at the moment I feel
like self-employment that should be
encouraged and I don't feel like the
Conservative government are actually
really encouraging people and
particularly young people there's plenty
of opportunities I've kind of I get off
and back and do a lot of things and I
feel like we should be encouraging
self-employment at small businesses look
Steven I'll come back to you Theo I mean
if we can talk about self-employed more
so you an entrepreneur from from the
get-go but but you you know hearing from
from leave there I mean there's a
there's a whole swathe of people who are
thinking what what are my job processor
it's gonna be if we're facing possibly
the worst recession since since the
Second World War
if not thought much further back than
that it looks pretty bleak
Fiona couldn't put it better myself it's
gonna be tough unemployment's gonna rise
the job market is gonna be incredibly
difficult youngsters are gonna face a
tsunami of job losses and this is one of
the few times I'm gonna say this because
I've always believed in a very free
economy and non-discrimination but we
need to start looking at some very
positive discrimination where we can
actually address the issues of people of
a certain age with support to employers
to make sure we encourage that I think
we need to really understand that or you
mean encourage young people in and and
older people out well no no no I'll talk
we're not wound half of bad news no my
first job so I left school at 16
vertical qualifications dyslexic said
some hundred applications out and got
like a hundred rejections in mind you
mark occasions wouldn't have been good
reading with my spelling but actually
the only reason I got a job my first job
was because at the time the government
were giving allowances to businesses I
think was about 1500 quid a year was a
lot of money but to take on somebody of
a certain age who hadn't had a job
before and so they took me on when they
were really not sure that they should
actually spending 15 under quit but the
fact was it was subsidized and that gave
me my first job and my first opportunity
and then I could move on from there so
we need initiatives like that that gonna
because the measures that the
Chancellor's put in were required but it
was a blunt instrument blunderbuss
approach that had to be done very
quickly and I'm afraid some people went
through the net now we need to focus a
lot more and illrick category by
category industry by industry
age by age requirement by a qualm it's
hard work and you can't just make I
thought no disrespect to our politicians
Steven but the fact is you know the
president government do like to make big
announcements for PR purposes and we
just need to do the graph and the work
first and actually accept that sometimes
it's going to be difficult and sometimes
you're gonna say things that are not
popular but you just want to be
respected not liked all the time and we
must stop this wanting to be liked by
the public let's get honest with them
tell them how it's going to be and
actually their address difficult issues
that are going to be difficult but if
you show you working at it people work
with you on it George I expressed
support for the much of what Theo just
said and much older panelists
I do think self-employment
entrepreneurship is going to be
necessary moving forward as so much of
our industry transforms we're dealing
with a new society we go through it
every time we see someone we think we're
gonna shake hands or embrace we don't do
these things anymore there's so much
that we don't do anymore look at the
shape of this show so now is the time
for us to get creative about how we as
the incoming generation into the
workforce are going to reshape the
economy there's lots of how's that I'm
gonna come to something move but yes I
think I mean I agree almost entirely
with what earth Theo said in that the
government needs to act now to stimulate
the jobs fee on the people going forward
they're going to be a lost generation
and let's face it the the young people
today people who are under 30 today have
pretty much lived their entire economic
lives since the 2008 downturn and
they've had to tighten their belts and
have lost out on things that were there
certainly when I was younger and the
reality is is that the government needs
to announce already have announced what
it's going to do to help businesses get
young people into training into schemes
like Theo says there can be different
sectors there could be different
standards and it needs to be responsive
to what is actually happening out there
because without it we're just going to
end up with a generation lost and even
in the announcements last week with
regard to the tutoring that school
children will now get a very welcome
announcement but an hour before the
announcement was made those aged 16 to
18 were taken out of it and these are
the people who are we are going to need
to help him they've already lost all
their youth services look have their
schools cut for the entire time that
they might have been there now is the
time to step up like Germany has already
announced stimulus packages and say what
are we going to do to create jobs and
training and encourage businesses to
take these people on because these are
actual
Suresh I can just be honest or yes yes I
would say that jess is absolutely right
to say that colleges that help 16 to 19
year olds should be included in the
coded catch-up fund and that's actually
spending that little bit more time in
education could make all the difference
so if we had targeted funding for
booster courses that just allowed young
people to build up their skills both
partners so before they go into the
labor market that could make all the
difference between them being employable
and attractive worker and being on the
job scrappy but I also think this issue
is too important to descend into party
politics and we've been hearing for a
long time about the need for a
commission on social care because
understandably not going to be extremely
important to address after this crisis
but I wonder whether we also need the
Commission on young people's
opportunities and jobs but the parties
to work together and agree that this
should be a priority debate the details
by all me but for us to try and
transcend and come together so see lots
of ideas being thrown in your direction
targeted jobs for young people Ayana
talking about a commission more answers
are not foreigners from Kirsty well on
the one hand move quicker than the other
have a commission to talk about it more
I mean well I can be assured here
there's no shortage of graft in the
Treasury and officials if you look at
the schemes they've put in place at
speed like the fair though the Soph
improvement the grants and so forth have
covered a lot to protect jobs but I
absolutely agree the then the next phase
to that is how then for those jobs were
not able to protect and the chancel has
been very candid we can't protect every
job there will be changes and as the
question of all changes in the way
people are working the use of online if
you look at GPS and a 3% of GPS we're
using online GP surgeries before the
pandemic now it's up to 99 percent so
pretty much all so there are changes to
how people are operating online that
will change the workplace and we're in
very active discussions with employers
particularly small and medium employers
to see what schemes we can put in place
to support them but the first priority
was protect as many jobs as possible
over 9 million have been through the
firm
scheme but we then need to look at the
next phase which is how particularly on
things like apprenticeships we get the
right skills working with the National
Citizen Service as well get the right
Career Service right skills the right
training for people moving forward well
it's so can I just jump in I really want
to commend the Treasury for stepping in
and providing so much support in under
the furlough arrangements you mentioned
that the idea of a commission for young
people being kind of talked about it
more but I think there's something more
to be said about focusing on the the
opportunities and the challenges that
will be faced by this generation and
getting some significant indication of
government commitment to this issue
there are a number of issues especially
when we talk about housing is a common
concern across this generation in which
the government has made a lot of the
right noises and talked about
commitments that it's going to make not
necessarily this government but this
this this generation of conservative
government government and we retro
actively find out that what's been
happening behind the scenes when there
are no eyes on the process is flies in
the face of the sounds that you've move
you've been making specifically what
what what prompted me to say that was
the recent revelations about the Robert
generic situation the Housing Minister
has come under fire for signing off on a
development a billion pound development
that that looks to undermine the
provision of social housing in the
community that this this this this thing
is planned in so I guess as a generation
we sometimes question the sincerity with
which you engage the the challenges of
our age group and vulnerable communities
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dog code at UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News